Let's explore how developers can use
Cloud Code to modernize a Cobalt
codebase. For the purposes of this demo,
we'll use AWS's mainframe modernization
demo repository. This is a medium-siz
credit card management system with
around 100 files, including Cobalt
programs, copy books, and JCL scripts.
Phase one, discovery and documentation.
Our sample Cobalt codebase has almost no
documentation. This is of course common
with legacy code bases where critical
business logic and regulatory
requirements are embedded within
undocumented code. The developers who
wrote the code have long since left the
organization and developers familiar
with Cobalt are hard to hire. We first
create a specialized sub aent using
cloud code/ aent command. This was our
Cobalt documentation expert in
translator. Sub aents can be invoked by
cloud code in parallel and they operate
with their own isolated context windows
to avoid polluting the main thread. We
enabled thinking mode and asked cloud
code to analyze the architecture of the
codebase. Cloud code created a to-do
list of all 94 files and tracked its
progress to ensure no files were
processed twice and nothing was missed.
The documentation Claude produced went
beyond simple code comments. For
example, let's look at the interest
calculation program CBAC4C.
It extracted the complete business
workflow, how the program reads
transaction category balances, looks up
interest rates by account group, applies
business rules for fallback rates, and
updates account records.
Claude did this for each file, but also
created two memory files as plain text.
Catalog.ext text translates cryptic
names like CBAC04C
into interest calculator batch program
relationships.ext
maps every dependency using a simple
pipe delimited format. Using these
indices, Claude then generated mermaid
diagrams, a complete map of the daily
batch processing workflow showing how
the data flows from transaction input
through posting interest calculation and
finally to customer statements.
In this demo, Cloud Code ran
continuously for an hour to draft over
100 pages of documentation. But Claude
Code is capable of running for over 30
hours autonomously, and the techniques
used here scale to much, much larger
code bases. Phase 2, migration and
verification. After thoroughly
documenting the Cobalt codebase, we
asked Claude to migrate one of its core
features to Java. We switched to
planning mode to ensure Claude would
think through the entire migration
strategy without prematurely editing
files. Claude analyzed the program
formerly known as CBAC4C
and identified complex cobalt patterns
like line break processing and multifile
coordination. Claude developed a
migration plan for this feature with
five phases. One, create the project
structure. Two, translate data models
from copy books to Java classes. Three,
build the IO layer compatible with the
original file formats. Four, convert
business logic while preserving Cobalt
specific behaviors. And finally, create
a dual test harness. One using GNU
Cobalt 3.2.0 for the original codebase
and one in Java 17. The resulting Java
code went beyond a simple syntax
translation. Claude created proper Java
classes with appropriate design
patterns, error handling, and logging.
idiomatic Java that a modern development
team would actually maintain. Next was
verification to ensure that the new Java
code worked the same as the Cobalt code
it was replacing. Claude created
multiple test data files and ran them
against both the original Cobalt and the
new programs. The verification compared
not just final outputs but intermediate
calculations, file rights and data
transformations. The result was perfect
bit forbit fidelity. Every calculation,
business rule, and edge case was
preserved. Of course, this demo
application is far smaller than your
legacy Cobalt codebases, but all the
techniques here are scalable. Claude
Code will empower your developers to
modernize code bases with confidence and
efficiency that simply would have been
impossible just 12 months ago.